Ultima Underworld II - Labyrinth of Worlds - Walk Through
Version 1.4 -- Mitch Aigner

Throughout this text, the following abbreviations will be used to
reference which level of which world something is on:

Worlds:
    * Britannia (B1 - B5)
    * Prison Tower (PT1 - PT8)
    * Killorn Keep (KK1 - KK2) plus Alternate Dimension (KKA)
    * Ice Caverns (IC1 - IC2)
    * Talorus (T1 - T2)
    * Scintillus Academy (SA1 - SA8) plus Vault (SAV)
    * Pits of Carnage (PC1 - PC3)
    * Loth's Tomb (LT1 - LT4)
    * Ethereal Void (EVR, EVB, EVY, EVP) Red, Blue, Yellow, Purple


Okay folks,... here we go. It starts with a Hint Sheet, to answer the most
Frequently-Asked-Questions while giving away as little as possible. After
that, you are on your own.


HINT SHEET (what to do if you get stuck) and FAQ's
----------

    * Be extra sweet to Nanna to avoid "Servant Strike" bug in early
      versions. If the servants are not officially all "on strike" you are
      fine. LB never does resolve the unrest, but the servants are willing to
      wait forever.

    * Be nice to Praecor Loth to avoid "endgame" bug. Do not attack him.
      He can be persuaded to give you what you want peacefully.

    * The only speech in the entire game is when the Guardian taunts you.

    * You cannot auto-map alternate dimensions like KKA, SAV, and the
      Ethereal Void. Sorry.

    * Progress in the game is event-driven. Waiting around won't help if
      you get stuck. If you have explored every bit of every level that you
      can access, and talked recently with everyone who will talk, you are
      bound to find some clues that you haven't tracked down yet.

    * Items needed for quests are often not in the world where the quest
      was first mentioned. You will have re-visit many worlds.

    * Talk to everyone (dead or alive) who isn't actively trying to kill
      you.

    * Re-visit all of the above very often for clues. Especially your
      friends in the castle. Altara, Mokpo, and Zoranthus are often helpful.

    * Spells above the 4th Circle cannot be cast in Britannia. Nystul
      tells you why this is the case in one of his early conversations.

    * More LORE skill will allow you to identify magic scrolls, wands,
      potions, armor, and weapons much more convieniently.

    * More skill with your weapon of choice (Sword, Axe, Mace, Missile, or
      Unarmed) will quickly improve your combat capabilites. Generally, you
      will want to pick one type of weapon and stick with it.

    * More CASTING skill will greatly reduce "spell backfires".

    * Skill levels in any category will not exceed 30. There is no limit
      on experience points (or training points).

    * If you see a purple flash, your screen starts rocking, the color map
      goes nuts, and your health goes down,... it's not a bug. You're under
      psionic attack by a hostile "Brain Creature"!

    * If you see a yellow flash, either a spell has backfired on you, or
      you have picked up a "cursed" item. If you are wearing a cursed item,
      you will take damage each time that you change levels or worlds. Use the
      "Name Enchantment" spell, or pay Merzam (KK1), to identify which item is
      cursed, if your LORE skill isn't high enough.

    * The strange object at the center of B5 is your transportation to the
      other worlds. Notice how at least one of its facets is always a bit
      brighter than the others.

    * The "massive" double door on PT2 does not open. You cannot get
      outside of the Prison Tower.

    * The "Listener" is found in Britannia (not Killorn Keep).

    * There are no keys to open any of the doors in Anodunos. Re-explore
      the waterways after the flood.

    * You find the wild dreams of Mokpo so bizarre that you have the
      sudden urge to write them all down.

    * No,... you never do find out what's the deal with the Eleomosynator.

    * Turn the pyramid all one color and look around. Many times.

    * "Use" the small Blackrock Gems on the larger one on B5.

    * In each world, you will hear of a particular place where the
      Guardian has worked some magic, or has some special influence. These
      locations must be purified!

    * Be sure to check out all of the sewer pipes, and the waterfalls.

    * The key to the Armoury is hidden in a pile of debris, in a pit,
      behind the Reaper on B4. It is VERY hard to find. You must be standing
      in just the right place, and be looking at the pile of debris at just
      the


SUMMARY
-------

In each of the 8 alternate worlds (not Britannia) there are always two
things you have to do:

  1. Find the small Blackrock Gem
  2. Destroy the Guardian's place of power

*   - indicates what you absolutely gotta have
%   - indicates optional ventures, usually worth the reward
<T> - indicates quests that cannot be completed right away (i.e. you must
      travel to other worlds, or wait for certain events to occur)


Brittania
* - Get the key to the Sewers from Dupre
* - Find the large Blackrock Gem on the lowest level
* - Talk to everyone in the castle often
* - Kill the "Listener" <T>

Prison Tower
* - Free Bishop
% - Free Milenus
% - Get the Cornucopia from Felix (a "box" which generates food)
% - Free Garg

Killorn Keep
* - Make friends with Altara often (she is helpful throughout the game)
* - Recover the Spellbook of Mors Gotha for Nystul (appears near end) <T>
% - Talk to Relk (make sure no one is around at your second meeting)
% - Have a drink with Lobar
% - Find the blue Banner of Killorn for Ogri <T>
% - Discover the history of the Trilkhai for Blackie <T>

Ice Caverns
* - Find the lost city of Anodunos and talk to Beatrice the "dire ghost"
% - Talk to Mokpo (he has some interesting visions of the Ethereal Void)

Talorus
% - Replace the Bliy Skup Ductosnore with an improved model

Scintillus Academy
* - Pass the Final Exam
% - Raid the Vault

Pits of Carnage
* - Deal with Dorstag (many ways to do this, not all of them violent)
* - Find the Sceptre of Deadly Seeker for Zoranthus <T>
% - Find a spare "Flam" runestone for Zogith
% - Play a few games with Blog

Tomb of Praecor Loth
* - Recover the Horn of Praecor Loth
% - Find the 7 pieces of map (makes level 3 a lot easier)(No 8th piece!)

Ethereal Void
* - Conquer all four colored worlds
* - Break into (and out of) the Shrine of Spirituality


GENERAL NOTES
-------------

First, a word of warning: Everything doesn't happen the same way each
time you play a new game. Some conversations and events in the castle vary
(so talk to everyone often,.. yes everyone). Also, the locations of
Runestones varies, sometimes they are not found where indicated (this
seems to depend on the character type that you selected,... my Druid
seemed to find them all where they should be,... my Fighter didn't).
Trainers don't always award the same number of points per Skill Point (and
sometimes using two skill points in one conversation will pay off better
than using one point in each of two conversations). All in all, there
seems to be quite a bit a variability.

A LOT depends upon your character type. For Example:

FIGHTER: Found 3 Runestones and a Short Sword in secret room (bedroom)
PALADIN: Found 5 Runestones and a Short Sword
SHEPARD: Found 5 Runestones and a Short Sword
DRUID:   Found 6 Runestones and a Dagger
FIGHTER: Found 1 Runestone and a wand after killing Liche (PC3) the
         first time. Replaying the battle from the prior saved game
         produced 1 runestone, a wand, and a scroll. Re-playing the
         same scenario the third time produce a wand and a scroll. The
         fourth time yeilded 2 runestones, a wand, and a scroll.


The game is very non-linear. This means that you can't necessarily
complete each level and go on to the next. Instead, you will find that you
spend a lot of time re-visiting places. Examples are the nasty monsters in
the first few levels of the Britannia sewers (you will have to bypass some
of these battles and return when you are strong enough to deal with them),
or the requirement that you return to the first three alternate worlds to
destroy the Guardians place of power once you gain the Wand of Altara.
In addition, re-visiting these early worlds later in the game can result
in conversation options with the residents that were not available
previousely.

There is no time limit in the game. All occurances in the worlds are
event-driven (not time dependent). If you are stuck at some point, waiting
around or sleeping won't help. The game progresses only as certain quests
are fulfilled.

Spells of the 4th Circle and above may not be cast in Britannia. This
is due to the fact that giant Blackrock gem impedes the operation of magic
(Nystul tells you about this in your 1st conversation with him). Magic
works fine in all of the other worlds.

Upon start-up, the contents of the secret room attached to your bedroom
will vary according to the type of character selected.

The large Blackrock Gem on level 5 will transport you to the other
worlds. Look for one facet of the gem that is brighter than the others. If
you walk into the lit facet, it will take you to that world. Only one
facet at a time is illuminated, and it will change to another if you watch
it for a while. Not all worlds are accessible at first. As certain quests
are completed, more worlds will become available to you.

If you are killed while in an alternate world, you are sent back to the
large Blackrock Gem in Britannia. You are also given full health and Mana
points. However,... lots of Experience points are deducted (up to 500). So
save your game often.

Skill levels will not go above 30 in any given category.

You would be well advised to:

1. Improve your Search skills early in the game. (10 to 20 points
   should be adequate).
2. Save your game before talking to someone.
3. Talk to all of the folks in the castle often. (and be REALLY nice to
   Nanna !! --- see "BUGS" section below).
4. Visit with Altara (KK1) often.


YOUR MISSION
------------

1) Find the small Blackrock Gem in each world. Have them treated by
   Nystul, and then "use" them on the large Blackrock Gem (B5).
2) Find the place where the Guardian draws power in each world (and
   disable it with the Wand of Altara).
3) Find the Horn of Praecor Loth.
4) Trap an air-Djinn within your body.
5) Destroy the massive Blackrock Gem which surrounds the castle.


THINGS TO DO
------------

Use a "torch" on "corn" to make popcorn.
Use an "oil flask" on a "piece of wood" to make a torch.
Use "pole" (not fishing) to activate switches you cannot reach.
Use some "thread" on a "pole" to make a "fishing pole" (fish for barter)
    (warning: only do this if you have a second "pole").
Use "rock hammer" to reduce boulders to sling stones.
Use "lump of wax" on "thread" to make a candle.


POTIONS
-------
         Yellow    - Healing
         Red       - Cure Poison or Restoration
         Purple    - Protection (Fire, missile, shield, etc.)
         Brown     - Speed or Freeze Time
         Black     - Invisibility
         Colorless - Restore Mana or other (not listed above)
         Green     - Hallucination or Poison
Note: "Basilisk Oil" appears as a "colorless potion" until identified.


GEM ENTRY - Approach Blackrock Gem from just left of:
---------

from N  : Prison Tower       - Small Round Gem
from NE : Killorn Keep       - Square Gem
from E  : Ice Caverns        - Diamond gem
from SE : Talorus            - Large Round Gem
from S  : Scintillus Academy - Circular prism (OK,.. it's a cylinder)
from SW : Pits of Carnage    - Triangular prism
from W  : Loth's Tomb        - Rectangle gem
from NW : Ethereal Void      - Heart shape gem


TRAINERS
--------

NOTE: Some trainers are better than some of the others some of the time.
      You may wish to save your game before training sessions to try to
shop around for the best deal. One Skill Point can be worth anywhere
from 1 - 3 improvement points.

Castle: Syria        - Sword, Unarmed
        Nystul       - Mana, Casting
        Julia        - Traps, Picklock, Repair
        Lady Tory    - Charisma (do it quick, she may not be around long)
        Patterson    - Charisma
        Dupre        - Axe, Mace
        Nelson       - Lore, Search (do it quick,.. )
        Iolo         - Swimming, Appraise, Missile
        Geoffrey     - Attack, Defense
        Fissif       - Picklock, Stealth, Traps, Acrobat (in prison)
        Goblin (B4)  - Track (not Rogwump, not Dripper,.. the other guy)
Tower:  Garg         - Unarmed
Keep:   Lobar        - Sword (seems better than Syria)
        Altara       - Mana, Casting
        Ogri         - Lore
Pits:   Fighters     - Axe, Mace (after earning their respect)


ARMOR/WEAPONS
-------------

Listed from worst to best:

Swords   : Dagger / Short Sword / Long Sword / Broad Sword
Maces    : Cudgel / Light Mace  / Mace
Axes     : Hand Axe / Axe / Battle Axe
Missiles : Sling / Bow / Crossbow
Shields  : Buckler / Small Shield / Wooden Shield / Tower Shield
Armor    : Leather / Mail (Chain) / Plate

Weapons/Armor condition (from worst to best):
Badly worn / Worn / Servicable / Excellent

Jewelled weapons/sheilds are more powerful than regular. In addition, a
"black" long-sword is better than an ordinary one.

Magical Armor/Weapons rating (from worst to best):

Minor        Protection/Toughness/Damage/Accuracy
             Protection/Toughness/Damage/Accuracy (no adjective)
Additional   Protection/Toughness/Damage/Accuracy
Major        Protection/Toughness/Damage/Accuracy
Great        Protection/Toughness/Damage/Accuracy
Very Great   Protection/Toughness/Damage/Accuracy
Tremendous   Protection/Toughness/Damage/Accuracy
Unsurpassed  Protection/Toughness/Damage/Accuracy


THINGS TO KEEP AN EYE OUT FOR
-----------------------------

"Pole" (comes in handy for flippimg remote switches, levers, etc.)
"Fishing Pole" (unlimited free food + use fish for barter)
"Rock Hammer" (reduces boulders to sling stones)
"Black Eggshell" from a spider
"Amethyst Rod"
"Grey Rock"
"Basilisk Oil" (looks like a "colorless potion" at first)
Anything made from "Fraznium"
"Horn"
"Banner"
"Purple potion of Iron Flesh"
Dream "plants" (unusual looking plants found at gravesites)


RINGS (magical)
-----

Ring of Protection   - IC1, Fall off Dam Control tower and enter pipe
Ring of Regeneration - LT3, In large pit with fireballs (secret room)
Ring of Poison Resist. - LT4 (1st Liche room - Morphius)


RUNES
-----

      Note: not all runes are at the locations given, there seems to
be some variability in the game, which may be somewhat random (or
may depend on the type of character created: my personal theory). If
a rune isn't found where indicated, try one of the other places.


A - KK1 (Altara after quests), PC2 (pentagram room), SA8 (pentagram)
B - PC1 (after death of Zaria), SA8 (in 3529 puzzle area)
C - T1 (among all the Kal stones), KK1 (Altara after quests)
D - B2 (Nystul's lab), PC1 (after death of Zaria), PC1 (Zaria's chest)
E - B3 (in chest with two Gazers), LT3 (by exit to level 4)
F - PC3 (From liche), SAV (chest), LT4 (Lord Umbria), LT4 (Lethe)
G - IC2 (Anodunos), SA8 (pentagram), PC2 (Earth Golem)
H - PC3 (from Liche), SAV (pentagram), LT4 (Lord Umbria)
I - IC2 (Anodunos), PC1 (after Zaria's death)
J - PC2 (Earth Golem)
K - T1, PC2 (pentagram room), PC1 (after Zaria's death), B1 (Tory dead)
L - B3 (by Fissif), IC1
M - IC2 (Anodunos), PC2 (pentagram room)
N - PC1 (after Zaria's death), LT4 (Morphius), B3 (chest near "haunt")
O - IC1, PC1 (after Zaria's death), B3 (chest near "haunt")
P - B2 (Nystul's lab), PC1 (Zaria's chest), B5 (above waterfall)
Q - IC2 (Anodunos), KK1 (Altara after quests)
R - PT5, IC2 (Anodunos), B2 (Nystul's lab), PC2 (Earth Golem)
S - PT5, SA8 (chest in bedroom)
T - SAV
U - IC2 (Anodunos), B2 (Nystul's lab), SA8 (pentagram)
V - PC3 (behind grey Reaper), SAV, LT4 (Lord Umbria)
W - IC1 (pack by skeletons),SA8 (pentagram), LT3 (by exit to level 4)
Y - PT5, B2 (Nystul's lab), SA8 (pentagram)


UNLISTED SPELLS
---------------

NOTE: Unlike the UW1 walkthru (which listed all spells), this version
      does not list all spells. This is in the interest of discouraging
      piracy.

1st Circle:
UDP - Bounce (from Nystul's Lab) elastic collisions jumping/moving
BWE - Locate (from scroll in Anodunos) Puts you back on the map if lost
             (Note: typically, this occurs when telporting to new area)

2nd Circle:
QMY - Dispel Hunger (PC1 - from Zaria) gives you that "well fed" feeling
QAC - Valor (PC1 - from Zogith after "Flam" stone) improves combat

3rd Circle:
AKC - Repel Undead (KK1 - from Merzan)

4th Circle:
IAF - Frost (PC1 - from scroll) shoots "cold" balls at multiple opponents
IS  - Thick Skin (from UW1) provides medium protection

5th Circle:
ITJ - Rune of Stasis (KK1 - from Merzan) sets time trap
RSY - Mending (PT5 - from scroll) repairs armour/weapons to "excellent"

6th Circle:
WE  - Map Area, puts your immediate surroundings on your map

7th Circle:
VPY - Tremor (from UW1) causes small earthquake
KAM - Summon Demon (creates hostile demon i.e. Hordling, Destroyer)
VOY - Enchant Item (KK1 - from Altara) turns weapons/armour "magical"
      Note: "Enchant" can be cast multiple times on the same weapon or
            armor for improved effects, also works to recharge wands.

8th Circle:
VKC - Armageddon (from UW1) destroys everything, everywhere (not good)
VJM - Smite Foe (kills just about anything)

IMPORTANT NOTE: When using the "Levitate" or "Fly" spells:
                Press "E" key to go UP
                Press "Q" key to go DOWN


SHOPPING: (Prices may be lower, depending on Charisma skill rating)
--------

Merzan (KK1) Spells: $175 Repel Undead
                     $175 Rune of Stasis
             Potions: $75 Invisibility
                      $50 Restore Mana
                      $35 Greater Heal
                      $30 Mana Boost
                      $20 Resist Blows
                      $15 Lesser Heal
            Services: $60 Recharge Item
                      $25 Identify item

Note: Merzan will also sell you a Potion of Iron Flesh ($100), or
      Flameproof ($60 + 10 bottles of water) if you ask for it special.

Note: Merzan will also accept gemstones, goblets, and sceptres in
      place of cash.

Beware of anyone peddling "Dragon skin boots".


CHARACTER CREATION
------------------

      I would suggest spending some effort up front in creating a good
character. Pay particular attention to the Strength attribute. If you
do not have a Strength of 25 or more, you will not be able to wear a
full set of neat "Plate Armor", and still have enough carrying capacity
for all your other nifty stuff.
      Create some characters and throw them all away, until you get an
idea of what a "good" set of stats looks like.
      I found Druids, Paladins, Shepherds, and Fighters to be pretty
good bets.
      NOTE: When you create a character, you will start with certain
skills at certain levels. There is a rumor to the effect that if
"Casting" is your highest initial skill, a "Mani" runestone will be
in your secret room upon game start-up. This will allow you to cast
the popular "Lesser Heal" spell right away.

Recommended Skills
------------------

     This is MY opinion about what skills to concentrate upon
developing. Your opinion will certainly be different.

Attack  - LOTS
Defense - LOTS
Weapon  - LOTS (choose only 1 of Sword / Axe / Mace / Missile)
Mana    - LOTS
Lore    - LOTS (so you can identify all these neat magical items)
Casting - LOTS (so you don't get so many "backfires")
Search  - Little
Acrobat - Little (so you don't get hurt in falls)

You can win the game with no weapons (UNARMED skill only).

Note: Weapon skill is very important (especially in the early game).
      When you are engaged in battle, your effective attack, and
      defense are both based on your Weapon skill (in addition to
      Attack and Defense). In other words, extra points in Weapon
      improve BOTH attack and defense, in battle. It also lessens
      the chances of damaging your weapon.


EXPERIENCE LEVELS: This lists how many experience points you need to
    reach each character level. You cannot get above 15th level. You
    can, however, continue to get experience points (and thus Skill
    Points) beyond this level. There appears to be no limit. After
    you hit 15th level, you continue to get 1 Skill Point for every
    150 Experience Points.

Level   Exp. Points    Exp./Skill pt.
-----   -----------    --------------
 1           0           50
 2          50           |
 3         100           |
 4         150           |
 5         200          \|/
 6         300          100
 7         400           |
 8         600           |
 9         800          \|/
10        1200          150
11        1600           |
12        2400           |
13        3200           |
14        4800           |
15        6400          \|/



BRITANNIA
---------

1) Get Sewer Key from Dupre (B1)
2) Convince Fissif (B3) to go quietly (he then becomes a Trainer).
3) Get Armoury Key - In debris pile in pit behind Reaper (B4) (It's
   there,.. keep looking), also a magical longsword (pick up the plants).
4) Find large Blackrock Gem (B5). This is used to teleport to the
   other worlds.

   There are two locked "massive" doors on level 3. One you can get to
both sides of easily, the other requires a key which Charles will find
for you about midway through the game.

Castle Events: Water shortage (resolved after you visit IC2)
               Servant's strike (avoided by taking complaints of Nanna
                    to Lord British). NOTE: See "BUGS" !!!
               Lady Tory murdered (unresolved until later)
               Charles finds a key
               Nelson murdered (murderer obvious)


PRISON TOWER
------------

Quests: Free Bishop and Milenus
        Free Felix and Marcus (and get the Cornucopia)
        Free Garg

FAQ: No you can't get through those big double doors on PT2.

1) Pick up the "Food Delivery Voucher" and pass yourself off as the
   grocery boy.
2) Talk to Felix (PT4) about eliminating Freemis.
3) Talk to the goblin armourer. Many possibilities here. One option is
   to tell him how to make Fraznium gauntlets the easy way (without
   asking anything in return). After this, he will lend you a pair on
   subsequent conversation.
4) Talk to Borne (PT6) and pass yourself off as the new interrogator
   that he is expecting to arrive. He will give you a pair of "Fraznium
   Gauntlets", and the password (password varies from game to game).
5) Talk to Borne again and demand the set of keys. He will give you
   another password and send you to Janar (PT4). Go to Janar and get
   the set of keys.
6) Talk to Bishop (PT8), using the Fraznium Gauntlets to penetrate the
   force field. Give him the second pair of Fraznium Gauntlets. Bishop
   will then tell you about the Gem that you are looking for.
7) Go back down to Borne and demand that he hand over the Blackrock Gem.
8) Use the keys to release Garg (PT6). Garg will kill every goblin in
   the entire tower. You may now pillage at your leisure.
9) Go back to Felix to collect the Cornucopia (box). This box will
   generate food each time that you open it (food will appear on the
   floor in front of you). The box will operate only for a limited
   number of uses.

Super shorcut: Talk to Felix (PT4). Kill Janar (PT4), and take his keys.
               Use keys to release Garg (PT6). You now have free run
               of the Prison Tower.


KILLORN KEEP
------------

Quests: Find the Blue Banner of Killorn for Ogri (Praecor Loth's grave).
        Find out the history of the Trilkhai for Blackie. (Wisp in EVB)
        Find Amethyst Rod (T1) and Black Eggshell (B4 or LT1) for Altara.

FAQ: "The Listener" is to be found in Britannia (not KK). If you
     pay close attention when Altara gives you the special dagger,
     she will pinpoint the spot.

Blow out candles and throw away to avoid trap to alternate dimension.
An alternative is to cast an "Open" spell on the locked portcullis.
This will allow you to explore the Alternate Dimension later, without
destroying the trap.

    DON'T kill any Brain Creatures that you may find. They are what
is keeping the Keep up in the air. If you crash the Keep, you can still
win the game (assuming that you have the Wand of Altara), however if
you do, Altara will be dead, and you will miss some of the other nice
things that she can do for you.

    Talk to everyone (keep in mind that all but one works for the
infamous Guardian). You will have fun with Relk (he attacks you on
your second meeting). Kintara and Lobar can help you to answer the
questions of Mystell.

    Ask Altara if she knows Bishop.
    Altara is helpful throughout the game, you will want to go back
to her many times. She provides you with:
A) A magic dagger, with which to kill the "Listener" in Britannia.
B) A special wand (made with a "black pearl", "amethyst rod", and a
   "black eggshell" from a spider). This wand will destroy the place
   of power in each world.
C) Some nice runestones.  (A, C, Q).
D) The "enchant item" spell.
E) Lots of good advice.

NOTE: Fans of the game "Wing Commander" may notice a striking
      resemblance between the story of the Trilkhai (Blackie), and the
      Kilrathi cat-warriors of WC. In fact,... if you re-arrange the
      letters in Trilkhai,......

KKA: There is a trap (carpet with candles) that will teleport you to
     an alternate dimension. This place is designed solely to kill you,
     and there is nothing of value to be found (except maybe a little
     experience and a couple of coins). The first part is a narrow
     hallway with rising/falling pillars. The hazard here is that they
     rise all the way to the ceiling and squash you (dead). The second
     part has numerous fireballs flying around. Since you will not have
     a "Flam" stone at this stage of the game, you cannot cast the
     "Fire protection" spell (result: death). If you ride the pillar
     up in the fireball area, there are two buttons and a chain. If
     you manipulate these correctly, a third area opens up,... filled
     with slippery floors and hostile imps. Walking into the large pit
     you find will teleport you back to the beginning of this nightmare.
     Walking into either one of the lava-falls will get you out.


ICE CAVERNS
-----------

Quests: Find the lost city of Anodunos

FAQ: There are no keys to open any of the doors in Anodunos. You
     will have to bash down the "sturdy" ones, and lockpick or
     use the "Open" spell on the "massive" ones.

      Jump up and down to stop slipping on the ice. "Walk on Water"
spell comes in really handy in this world.

1) Find your way down to level 2 and visit with Mokpo. He has some
   interesting visions. When you get to the Ethereal Void, you will
   wish that you had written these down.

2) Find the Dam Control Tower and make your way through the maze to
   find the key, and the door (A two step process). Release the
   floodgates.

3) Re-explore the waterways to find the Lost City of Anodonus. Talk
   to the "dire ghost" there,... and keep an eye out for a secret
   door. Use the Orb many times, for a clue. (Note: the many visions
   you see in the Orb are not all from the past,... one of them is of
   the very near future,... and tells you of your ultimate objective).

4) Pick up the Blackrock Gem on the ice plains by the river in the
   south-central areas.

    Don't forget to locate the Filanium deposits. You will need to
    know where they are later. (Note: they appear as "watery mud").

Dam maze controls - Key: Chain, switch, lever all up, pushbutton light
                         (flip switch &amp; push button to achieve this)
                   Door: Chain still up, Switch &amp; lever down, button
                         dark (flip lever &amp; switch down, and push button)

Instructions for Dam control:
  "Manipulating the controls causes the maze to change in a two step
process. To get the key, make sure the lever, switch, and chain are
all up. To reach the door, lower the lever and switch, and press the
button. Walk through the force field to get to maze. Destroy this
note afterwards, else we'll both hang."


TALORUS
-------

FAQ: No,... you never do find out what's the deal with the Eleomosynator.

      The brass plates in the floor propel you upwards. This is used
to travel between levels, and to leave Talorus. You just have to run
over the plates at the right speed.
      Don't forget to pick up any "Nutritious Wafers" you find (light
weight,... and very filling), or any "Light Sphere"s (brighter than
the lantern,... but shorter duration).

1) Talk to the Historian
2) Talk to the Futurian and get Control Crystal M4Y8
3) Talk to the Data Integrator (this conversation doesn't go well)
4) Talk to the Dialogicians and get scroll
5) Talk to the Data Integrator again (goes much better this time)
6) Go down to level 2 and get the Delgnizator, and crystal E0Y2
7) Go to Bliy Skup Chamber and kill Bliy Skup Ductosnore
8) In chamber: place M4Y8 control crystal in yellow input hopper
               place E0Y2 pattern crystal in purple input hopper
               place Delgnizator on blue repulsor circle
               pull the chain
9) Go back to the Historian, and he will teleport you to the gem
   that you are looking for (if you haven't found it already).

NOTE: There is a small room with a switch and a brass plate, located
      right next to the Bliy Skup chamber. This is the "Light Sphere"
      re-charging station! Real handy!


SCINTILLUS ACADEMY (Final Exam)
-------------------------------

Note: Mana will NOT regenerate on levels 2 thru 7. These levels CAN
      be solved without it,... but it sure makes life easier in a few
      places. You will need some magic in the Vault, but that is on
      level 8 (where Mana DOES regenerate).

Interesting stuff: Try out the vending machines. (bring some coins).

Level 1: Drop the Gold Coffer on the Pressure Plates to open the
         three Portcullises. The right-hand Portcullis is the exit. The
         other two are traps.
Level 2: Push button to open Portcullis. In hallway with arrow traps,
         timing is everything.
Level 3: Use "Telekinesis" (wand provided in hallway as you enter).
         First, jump on the pillars and head to the west wall, push
                the button.
         Then, jump north 2 pillars,.... then west 2 pillars.
         Then, use "Telekinesis" to activate the pushbutton for the
               row NEXT to the one you are in. You must be standing on
               the very edge of your pillar to reach, and look around
               in the dark (or use "Daylight" or a "Light Sphere")
               to find the button. Then jump to exit. Unfortunately,
               the cool Wand of Telekinesis disappears when you exit
               this level.
Level 4: Find the two keys on the NW and SE corner towers. Exit in NE.
Level 5: Use pole provided to flip all switches up. Be careful not to
         step on the Pressure Plates in front of each switch. Then go
         through the door and jump for the Key. Do not hit the button
         or pull the chain. Also, don't forget to pick up the Moonstone.
Level 6: Walk over plates to get key (arrow traps). Stepping on any of
         the plates results in a "headless" appearing at that plate. The
         arrow traps are triggered when you attempt to take the items
         in the center. The peacful headlesses will get hit by the
         arrows meant for you. After that, it's just a matter of good
         mapping notes (and determination).
Level 7: "Levitate" spell is nice,... otherwise:   MAP:

                 Exit
                  |
                 P|            First swim for the Key and the potion.
              X-X-X X X
              |                K - Key
              X X X X X        P - potion
             K|                X - Pillars
North >-      X X X-X-X
              |   |   |        Save your game after each successful
              X-X-X X X        jump to avoid irritation. The "Shift-J"
                      |        key combination makes these jumps much
              X X X X Enter    easier (Read about it in your manual).

      Each column has an arrow symbol on the top. The arrow points
to another column, which will disappear permanently once you step on
the first column. If you can land on the very edge of a column (this
is difficult, but not impossible) without stepping on the arrow, then
the column it points to will not disappear.


Level 8: 3.5.2.9 Count the alcoves from the red carpet (clockwise)
         Don't miss the key behind a bed, or the secret room.

Vault  : Yikes! First, cast "Dispel Rune" to avoid time trap, or use
                       the "Flameproof" spell, or toss a coin through.
                Then, cast "Telekinesis" to activate button. Or you can
                      shoot the button with a "Magic Arrow" spell.
                Then, swim to find a switch, then swim to find the door.
                      Hint: take a left initially, then a right at the
                            first intersection (This gets you close).
                Then, walk through walls to find the door switch.
                      Hint: go straight in, and straight out.
                Then, swim into the Red Moongate. (Or, you may use
                      "Fly" or "Bounce" here to bypass the next step).
                Then, cast "Flameproof", open all 3 doors, and go
                      through purple Moongate in the center building.
                Then, swim to the path and find the hidden room, go
                      too far and you will hit a nasty teleport trap.
                Then, find the hidden room behind the hidden room, if
                      you have some form of "Fraznium". Examine the
                      floor here carefully.


PITS OF CARNAGE
---------------

Quests:  Get a Flam Runestone for Zogith (see Runestone locations)
         Get Sceptre of Deadly Seeker for Zoranthus (EVR)

There are several ways to do this world:

EASY WAY: 1) Talk to Dorstag (he refuses to give you the stone)
          2) Play the game with Blog (PC3), use a "Grey Stone", and he
             will become your friend (or pick up one of his "black
             stone"s you see laying there and let him win a few). Ask
             for his help in obtaining the Gem.
          3) Talk to Dorstag again, and ask for the stone.

HARD WAY: 1) Talk to Dorstag (he declines your challenge)
          2) Talk to Krilner
          3) Challenge Zaria (and defeat her)
          4) Challenge Dorstag (and defeat him)
             Note: You may have to challenge a few more fighters in
                   order to establish your reputation as a bad dude.

REAL HARD: 1) Push Dorstag out of his rooms and down the hallway
           2) Kill him (Hint: He has trouble with Flame Strike, as well
              as Frost).
           3) Repeat with all of his guards. If you push them far
              enough away from Dorstag's Quarters, the others will
              not attack you.
           4) Raid the secret room in his quarters.

Don't forget to visit Zoranthus (PC2). Just hit the silver button (the
second one you find). You will need the Djinn-bottle he has. Pay close
attention to the instructions.

Note: I was able to kill Dorstag and all his guards in his quarters. I
      used up two Wands of Frost while standing in one of the doorways.
      By the time both wands had been used up, the only one standing
      was Dorstag (and he was in really rough shape).

Note: check the graffiti on the walls in the central area of level 1
      after you defeat Dorstag!

Note: Jospur will arrange arena fights for you. Winning a few of these
      will improve your social standing, as well as provide lots of
      experience points. Not to mention $$$.


TOMB OF PRAECOR LOTH
--------------------

Quests: Find Trystero's bones for him (by jewelled axe and Gem)
        Talk to Praecor Loth for Helena
        Get Horn and Banner


Level 1: Get all 8 pieces of the map for level 3.
         * By skeletons
         * By Fire Elemental
         * Golem has one (on him)
         * Push button by stairway
         * Behind secret door by locked door
         * Behind door with 5 switches (flip all down, right-to-left)
         * Behind locked Portcullis (note press. plate on pillar nearby).
         * There is no 8th piece (sorry).

Level 2: Talk to the ghosts, and then do a little "Walk on Water"

Level 3: Hope to hell you have most of the map. Exit is at North-
         center edge of level. Life is much easier if you have a key,..
         Head for the NE quadrant, and two places with water. One place
         has a hidden switch on the opposite wall (near water-level),
         which will open a secret door (key). The other place has some
         buttons,... push them to unlock secret door (or just bash it).
         This second water area provides a shortcut through level 3.
         NOTE: You have to activate the Flood control switch in the
         Southeast quadrant in order to do this, else the second water
         area doesn't have any water in it, eliminating the shortcut.

Level 4: Kill the "Three" (Morphius, Lord Umbria, and Lethe).

         Throw away candles from pentagram to get through "Outer Space"
         To get across pillars, use "Fly" or locate the four pillars that
         aren't teleporters (Southmost, then NE, then E, then SE). There
         is a teleport trap in the water to take you back to the start,
         if you should fall in.

         Switch in area behind waterfall will open the big double doors.
         The "Despoiler" has the key that you will need.

         Fire Pit: just walk right over (invisible walkway).
         Talk to Praecor Loth and convince him that he's really dead.
         He will give you the Horn. Pick up the blue Banner while you
         are there.


ETHEREAL VOID
-------------

      If you have any LSD,... this would be a good time to take it.

FAQ: If your screen starts rocking, the color map goes nuts, and
     your health goes down,... it's not a bug. You're under psionic
     attack by a hostile "Brain Creature".

      The levels are divided into colors (Red, Yellow, Blue, Purple)

      When you complete each color, you will be dumped on top of a
white pyramid. Each time you step on one of the blocks of the pyramid,
it will change colors. When all of the blocks are the same color, a
moongate of that color will appear on the ramps above. This will take
you to some interesting places. When all 4 basic colors have been
completed, a fifth color (orange) becomes available. Do the pyramid
thing one more time, in orange, and the moongate will take you to the
base of the Shrine of Spirituality. Die-hard fans of the arcade game
"Q-bert" may find this whole pyramid thing strangely familiar. Also, in
the treasure area found as a result of turning the pyramid red,
Underworld 1 fans will recognize Rawstag the troll.


RED: Cast "Flameproof" before entering. A "Destroyer" guards the "Sceptre
     of Deadly Seeker" that you will need. Lots of Imps and Fire
     Elementals around. This is definitely the nastiest level in the
     Void,... so prepare. You will also need some form of "Cure Poison".

YELLOW: Climb up on top of the maze. There is an "etched brass wall"
        where this is easy to do. Cruise around the highest level of
        the maze until you see a pillar/elevator in one corner (just
        like the moving pillars in Britannia level 3) Past this
        pillar is where you want to be. Remember what old Mokpo told
        you in the Ice Caverns? ("golden maze" "climb up on top of the
        walls").

BLUE: Barter with Prinx (he wants 2 "eyeballs" from a flying Brain).
      Talk to a Wisp (white sparkles) to find out the history of the
      Trilkhai.
      Cruise down the exit hallway (more moving pillars) to the outer
      ring. Nasties await,... so prepare. In the center of the ring
      is an orange moongate on a pillar. Jump into the central pit,
      and use the "Bullseye" to bounce up to the gate. Mokpo: "an
      endless walkway, glowing blue" "jump and you are thrown high in
      in the air".

PURPLE: Swim up the slippery hill and over the edge, follow the double
        arrow and use the "Bullseye"s to travel straight ahead. You
        will wind up on a narrow, slippery path,... that will lead
        through an image of the Guardian,... and into the Stick Maze.
        Past the maze (keep to the left,.. mostly), lies the goal.

SHRINE: For some reason, you are not put in the Shrine of Spirituality,
        but are teleported to the base of the tower that it lies on top
        of. There are several ways to get in (and out):
        A) Use "Levitate" of "Fly" to get to the top of the tower. Lower
           yourself until you are standing at floor level of the Shrine.
           Cast "Portal" to get through the bars (and back out).
        B) "Levitate" or "Fly" to the top of the tower. Throw one of the
           Moonstones through the bars. Throw the other Moonstone on
           the ground at the base. Cast "Gate Travel" on this
           Moonstone to get in (and "Gate Travel" again on the moonstone
           at the Shrine to get out,.. after remembering to pick it up).
        C) Use the "dream" plants just before bedtime. In your dream,
           pick up the blackrock gem at the Shrine and throw it through
           the bars. It will be there when you arrive later. To disable
           the Shrine with Altara's wand, you must merely get close to
           the bars.


ENDGAME
-------

      Okay, now that you have found all 8 gems (and "used" them on the
big gem on B5),.... and destroyed all 8 places the Guardian was drawing
power from (with Altara's wand),... and you have the "Horn" of Praecor
Loth,... and the Djinn bottle from Zoranthus,... we're ready to go:

1) Cruise to the Filanium mud deposits (IC2, SE corner, "watery mud")
   and toss in a "colorless potion" of Basilisk oil. You will notice
   that "the thick oil permeates the mud".
2) Take a swim in the mud ("The oily mud coats your skin").
3) Cruise to EVR (Ethereal Void - Red) and take a bath in the lava pit
   you are dropped into ("The oily mud bakes on your skin"). You can
   also do this in the lava pit in the Brain Creature room on KK2, or
   anywhere else that there is lava to stand in.
4) Cruise to the "Sigil of Binding" (go through a few White moongates
   in the void until you get there,... there is a sign).
5) Cast an "Iron Flesh" spell, or drink a potion if you have one. ("The
   baked mud hardens into a clear glaze").
6) Stand in the center of the pentagram and set the Djinn bottle down.
   Break it with your weapon. If all goes well, the Djinn will enter
   your body,... otherwise you're dead (so SAVE before you try this).
7) Cruise to Killorn Keep and check out the soldiers barracks. Behind
   the door on the north wall you will find Mors Gotha. After a little
   verbal banter, she will attack you (along with about 6 guards). Once
   you have beat her up some, the Guardian will teleport her out of
   there (but you still have to deal with all of the guards).
   NOTE: if you haven't bashed down this door yet,.. it's about time.
   NOTE: If Mors gives you trouble, just crash the keep (by killing
         the Brain Creatures in the basement).
8) Pick up the Spellbook she leaves behind, and return it to Nystul.
   He will ask two questions. Nell has the answers ("Throne room" and
   "4:00"). Note: Fissif said 4:15 ("4:15" or "4" also work).
9) Mors Gotha will re-appear in YOUR castle, and you will have to deal
   with her again (in a permanent fashion). She will also have a few
   more guards with her,... who will also have to be dealt with.
10) Cruise to the Throne Room of Lord British. You will find the whole
   castle crew assembled. Tell Nystul that you are ready.
11) The rest is automatic,... Nystul casts a major spell, while you
   blow the horn (with the added "Oomph" provided by the air-Djinn).
   The castle is free, and Britannia is once again safe for Democracy.
   At least it would be except for that pin-head Lord British. Oh well,..
   you never really did care for politics anyway........


GEM LOCATIONS
-------------

Prison Tower          - Borne has it (PT6)
Killorn Keep          - guarded by headlesses (KK2)
Ice Caverns           - On ice plain by river in south-central area (IC2)
Talorus               - Island in center of lava lake (T2)
Scintillus Academy    - In pentagram (SA8)
Pits of Carnage       - Dorstag has it (PC1)
Loth's Tomb           - Behind row of boulders (LT1) (use "rock hammer")
Ethereal Void         - In Shrine of Spirituality


GUARDIANS' POWER LOCATIONS
--------------------------

Prison Tower          - Bishop's cell (PT8)
Killorn Keep          - lava pit in Brain Creature room (KK2)
Ice Caverns           - fountains of Anodunos (IC2)
Talorus               - Bliy Skup Chamber (T1)
Scintillus Academy    - Pentagram (SA8)
Pits of Carnage       - room with bloodstained walls (PC1) (Northmost)
Loth's Tomb           - Behind row of boulders (LT1) (use "rock hammer")
Ethereal void         - Shrine of Spirituality


INTERESTING THINGS
------------------

Get Mokpo hooked on drugs!  After you have used the dream plants in
your sleep, take some to old Mokpo. He will provide you with more
clues as to how to conquer the Ethereal Void.

Find out what old Nystul is hiding in his locked chest in the Library.

Talk to all of the folks at the castle after you have been dipped in
Filanium mud / Basilisk oil.

Re-visit Garg on PT6 later in the game, he has a letter for you.

You will find some dream "plants" in your travels. These are typically
found at gravesites, and have little pale green flowers that look
like "X"s. Eat one of these just before sleep for visions of the
Ethereal Void. WARNING: You CAN die in your dreams.

Check out the graffiti on the walls in the center of PC1 after you
defeat Dorstag.

Cast "Tremor" in the Ethereal Void. The best place I found is on the
multi-colored floor area right at the exit.

Cast "Mending" (RSY) on an empty lantern to re-fill it.

Dorstag has an unlimited supply of "crossbow bolt"s. The problem is
that to get them, you have to let him shoot you for a while. The
"missile protection" spell works well for this.

Fissif (once in jail) has an unlimited supply of "lockpick"s for sale.

If the screen flashes:
    RED    - You have been hit (injured)
    BLUE   - You are drowning (get out of the water,... fast)
    PURPLE - You are under psionic attack by a Brain Creature (yikes!)
    YELLOW - You have picked up a "cursed" item, or a spell has backfired
             on you.

Cursed items cannot be used (or "uncursed"). If you are wearing a
"cursed" item, you will take damage each time that you change levels
or worlds. Get rid of the item! You may have to have high LORE skill,
or use an "Name enchantment" spell to find out which items are cursed.

Be sure to check out the area above the waterfall on B3.

It seems that nobody in any of the worlds knows how to swim, except
you, and the Lurkers. Try pushing a monster into any nearby water.

TRAP DOORS - every once in a while, you will discover a trap-door in
the ceiling somewhere. You can do nothing with these. Should you fall
into a bottomless pit elsewhere in the same world, this is where you
will end up.

Time and Flame traps: If you see a glowing "Tym" or "Flam" symbol, it
      is a trap. You can either cast "Dispel Rune" to destroy it,...
      or just pick any object from your inventory (like a "coin") and
      throw it at the trap. The trap will be disarmed, and you can pick
      up your object (with no damage done). Warning: do not throw any
      weapons/armor that are already in a "badly damaged" state.

Moonstones: There are two of these: One on B3 in a chest guarded by a
      "haunt" (red ghost) behind a locked door, the other just lying
      in a hallway in the Scintillus Academy (SA5). To use them, you
      cast "Gate Travel" on one, and it teleports you to the other. A
      good example of their usefullness is if you ever want to return
      to SA8 (Scintillus Academy). Drop one stone there, and keep the
      other one with you.

Way to get Armoury key: Walk up to the Reaper (to get its interest)
      and then lure it back to the entryway (where you came in). Now
      turn off your light source, and swim around the Reaper to get
      back to the pit it was guarding. The key is in a pile of debris
      in the pit (really! it's there! keep looking!). If you're quick,
      you can get in and out without a fight. Also, there is a nice
      sword behind a large plant (you have to try to "pick up" the
      plant, and suddenly the sword falls out where you can see it).

Way to get past locked things in Britannia: Since you cannot cast an
      "Open" spell while in Britannia, you take advantage of the way
      that targeted spells operate. Go to any alternate world and
      cast your "Open" spell. The cursor will change to indicate that
      the spell has been cast, and will then wait for you to target
      the spell. At this time, run back to Britannia, and find the
      locked object you wish to open,... then release the spell.

Blackrock Gem (B5): You will notice that one of the 8 facets is a bit
      brighter than the rest. This is the one that you can walk into
      to teleport to alternate worlds. The active facet is constantly
      changing (you can see this if you watch the gem later in the
      game.)

      Initially, only one facet will be lit (Prison Tower).

      The next two facets (Killorn Keep, and Ice Caverns) will open
      up when:
          A) You have set foot on level 6 of the Prison Tower
          B) You have talked to Miranda afterwards (where she tells you
             the servants have become "increasingly rude and irritable").

      The next three facets (Talorus, Scintillus Academy, and Pits of
      Carnage) will open up after the murder of Lady Tory. This event
      is triggered when:
          A) You possess the small blackrock gem from Ice Caverns.
          B) You have killed "The Listener".
          C) You have talked with Miranda after doing all of the above
             (this conversation is interrupted by a guard).

      The last two facets (Tomb of Praecor Loth and the Ethereal Void)
      become available after the murder of Nelson. This event is
      triggered when:
          A) You have talked with Zoranthus (PC2).
          B) You possess the blackrock gem from the Scintillus Academy.
          C) You have "Used" the blackrock gem from Talorus on the larger
             one (B5).
          D) You have talked with Miranda after doing all of the above
             (she tells you that Nelson wishes to see you right away).
          E) Nelson is dead.
          F) Patterson is dead (No, you can't leave him hanging around).

      The next trigger-point is the appearance of Mors Gotha in
      Killorn Keep. This event is triggered by succesfully containing
      an Air-Djinn in your body. When you return from the Ethereal
      Void after accomplishing this, you should be met by four soldiers
      from KK at the big blackrock gem on B5. Once you have dispatched
      them, go to the soldiers barracks area of KK1. In the room with
      the locked door, you will find Mors Gotha. When you have defeated
      her (and her soldiers), she will leave behind a spellbook. Take
      this book to Nystul. You will also find that Altara has fled
      from the Keep at this time.

      The final trigger-point occurs when Nystul has studied the
      spellbook of Mors Gotha, and asks you to find the answers to
      some questions. This is triggered by:

          A) "Using" all 8 small gems on the larger (it will start
             flashing when this is done).
          B) Destroying the Guardians place of power in each of the
             8 worlds.
          C) Posessing the Horn of Praecor Loth.
          D) Talking to the right people after all of the above (however,
             I am not entirely sure who they are at this writing).

      The center of level B5 will change to icy walls when you return
from the Ice Caverns for the first time. This area will remain frozen
until you eliminate the Guardian's influence from Anodunos.

      Don't forget to "use" the small blackrock gems you find (after
treatment by Nystul) on the large gem. This will lock these worlds open,
so you don't have to wait around.

Quick experience: In the Scintillus Academy (SA1), there are those
      Portcullises that you opened by placing the Gold Coffer on the
      correct Pressure Plate. Open the center Portcullis. Inside you
      will find an endless supply of "hostile mongbat"s to kill. They
      just keep coming! (and they are pretty easy to deal with by this
      time). You can keep this up until the game starts to slow down,
      from rendering all those countless bloodstains on the floor that
      you are generating (I noticed this after about 500 kills).
          Also, on SA5, there is a pull-chain near a portcullis which
      produces skeletons each time that you pull it.
          Also, on SA8, a new monster will appear in the center of the
      puzzle each time you screw up (the 3:5:2:9 puzzle).
          Talk to Jospur on PC1. He will be happy to arrange some fights
      for you (you make some $$$ as well).
          Also, if you are really looking for some action,... try the
      "Summon Demon" spell (KAM).


LOCKED DOORS: Unless a door or chest is "massive", it can be bashed
      in. It is best to remove your weapon (to avoid damage to it),
      and use your bare hand (which seems impossible to damage). This
      also works for locked "secret door"s. NOTE: "locked secret doors"
      are always accompanied by a hidden switch nearby. Search the walls
      carefully to reveal it.

BASILISK OIL: Appears as a "colorless potion". You only need one.
              B3  - in chest guarded by two Gazers
              SAV - in chest at the end of the vault
              PC1 - in Zaria's chest
              PC3 - in Really Secret room behind Liche

Don't forget to check out any sewer pipes that you find, and waterfalls.

An extra Djinn Bottle may be found in the Ethereal Void in the bonus
area accessed by turning the pyramid all purple. Works just fine.

"Grey Stone" (PT1), (T1) Futurians back room, (LT1) near gem.
"Amethyst rod" in Talorus (T1), room with many crystals. Don't forget
      to score the "Nutritious Wafers" here. Lightweight, and filling.
      Note: another "amethyst rod" can be obtained in the Ethereal Void.
"Spider Eggshell" in B4, and LT1
"Horn" (LT4) Loth's gravesite
"Banner" (LT4) Loth's gravesite

      You cannot auto-map alternate dimensions like KKA, SAV, and the
Ethereal Void. Sorry.

STEALING: If you find something "belonging to a XXXX", tread with
      caution. If the XXXX is upset, taking its belongings will almost
      certainly turn it to the "hostile" state,... IF it sees you do
      it (and that's the trick). If something is "peaceful", you may
      get away with taking things from under their nose, but I would
      recommend saving your game first!

CRASHING the KEEP: If you kill the Brain Creatures in the room on
    KK2, the Keep will fall from the sky and crash. You will find
    that much has changed upon your next visit. Since this results
    in the death of Altara (very bad), I would not recommend it.
    But, when Mors Gotha arrives, Altara leaves the Keep of her own
    accord. At this point, feel free to experiment. In fact, this is
    a great way to get rid of Mors and her flunkies (her spellbook
    will remain).

LIGHT SOURCES: Tired of torches going out when you least expect it?
    Having trouble finding more oil for your lantern? Not to worry!
    Go into the "data" sub-directory and find a file called "shades.dat".
    Re-name it to something like "shadez.dat" and delete the original.
    When you fire up the game, all lighting will be like "Daylight".
    No torches, no lanterns required ever again!



SECRET DOORS
------------

    * B1 - Seven (one in your bedroom, six around perimeter of castle)
    * B4 - One (between rats area and goblins area)
    * KK1 - Two (in barracks area)
    * KK2 - One (in room near portcullis)
    * IC2 - One (Anodunos) (locked - hidden switch)
    * SA6 - One
    * SA8 - One (in one of the bedrooms) (locked - hidden switch)
    * PC1 - Two (Dorstag's quarters) (Zaria's quarters)
    * PC2 - Two
    * PC3 - One (near area with 3 reapers) (locked - hidden switch)
    * LT1 - One (near massive door)
    * LT3 - Three (two by water) (one in bottom of fire pit)
    * LT4 - Two (in Morphius area)


REALLY SECRET ROOMS
-------------------

These areas are found if you use the "Roaming Sight" spell. We're
talking REALLY secret:

KK2 - when you come down the stairs to get to the Brain creature room,
    walk straight until you are facing the wall (just a few steps forward
    after you arrive on level 2). Turn 45 degrees to the left so that you face
    the corner. Cast "Portal". Nothing worthwhile here (unless you need some
    sling stones). NOTE: this area does become available to you if you crash
    the Keep.

IC2 - Anodunos. Go to NW corner of map (Anodunos). There is a piece of
    a building in the ice by a table and chair. Go to the SW wall of this
    building and face North. Cast "Portal". Good scrolls here!

PC3 - behind the room with the Liche. Face the east wall and cast a
    "Reveal" or "Portal" spell. Basilisk Oil, Book, Orb here!

SA6 - Teleport maze. There is a rest area in the red-carpet section of
    the maze (bench, chair, and vending machine). Stand in the SW corner of
    this area (chair) and face SW. Cast "Portal". There is nothing in here.

LT2 - Head for the NE corner of the level. Head directly south, down
    this hallway until you face a "cave-in". Cast "Portal". Nice wand and
    magic leather vest!

LT4 - Jump down into the fire pit just outside of Praecor Loth's grave
    site. You will know that you are in the right place when a bunch of "Fire
    Elementals" attack you. At either end of the pit are "spacey twinkles",
    which teleport you out of the pit. The twinkles are under a ledge. Walk
    towards the twinkles until just before you go under the ledge. Cast
    "Levitate" of "Fly" and rise all the way to the ceiling. There are two of
    these. The one to the west has neat stuff.


COOL WEAPONS AND OTHER STUFF
----------------------------

Note: Not everything appears where it should be. There seems to be
some variability from game to game here. All is disclaimed.

Sword of Stone Strike          - LT1 (in pack behind portcullis)
Jewelled Axe of Fire Doom      - SAV (under floor tile with Vas, Tym)
Jewelled Mace of Undead Bane   - LT4 (Loth's gravesite)
Cudgel of Entry                - PC1 (Dorstag's secret room)("Open")
Leather leggings of Stealth    - B2  (Armory - in chest)
Broadsword of Poison Weapon    - IC2 (Anodunos - caution: badly worn)
Battle Axe of LifeStealer      - EVP (behind hidden wall in stick maze)
Leather Boots of Bounce        - T2  (among many other boots)
Leather vest of Flameproof     - LT3 (South-center room by ladder up)
Chain Cowl of Valor            - B3 (ghost above waterfall)
Plate Gauntlets of Missile Protection - LT4 (Morphius area)
Leather cap of Missile Protection - PC3 (behind "Dire Reaper")

Jewelled Sword of Major Damage - B4  (in large plant in Reaper area)
Jewelled Sheild of Unsurpassed Protection - LT4 (Really secret area)
Jewelled Mace of Unsurpassed Damage - LT4 (Really secret area)
Jewelled Dagger of Unsurpassed Damage - LT3 (room S-SW at map edge)
Leather Vest of Unsurpassed Protection - LT2 (Really secret area)
Chain Gauntlets of Unsurpassed Protection - LT2 (northmost area)
Plate Boots of Unsurpassed Toughness - LT3 (in big fire pit)
Tower Shield of Very Great Toughness - LT2 (by stairs to LT3)
Black Sword of Great Accuracy  - LT4 (Lethe has it)
Jewelled Axe of Great Damage   - LT1 (next to Blackrock Gem)
Long Sword of Great Accuracy   - LT1 (in debris pile as you enter)
Broadsword of Great Damage     - EVB (below orange moongate)
Mail Shirt of Tremendous Protection - EVB (below orange moongate)
Mace of Major Damage           - IC2 (Anodunos - caution: badly worn)
Sceptre of Shockwave - T2 (behind wall panel (North), use "Telekinesis")
Wand of Flame Wind             - LT2 (Really secret area)
Piece of wood of Lightning     - PC3 (Arm of the "Dire Reaper")


BUGS
----

1. Jerky motion (display pauses). Solutions:
   1. Turn of the sound.
   2. Quit the game, and restore where you left off.
   3. Wield your weapon briefly (un-verified rumor).

2. Servants on strike. You're out of luck. Start over :-(
   NOTE: when the servants (Nanna) first start complaining, you must agree with
   everything they say, and then take their concerns to Lord British. If
   you do not take care of this quickly, the servants go on strike
   permanently,... and you are screwed. Fixed by Patch.

3. Game locks up when talking to Wisp in EVB. Make sure that you have
   talked to Blackie (Trilkhun in KK1) before engaging Wisp.

4. Can't add more notes to map. Solution: Need more free space on your
   hard drive.

5. Sleeping with moonstone on cursor to break into Ethereal Void. DO
   NOT do this. It really hoses up the plotline, which can cause you
   problems, missing conversations, etc.

6. Nystul won't complete the endgame. When given the Spellbook from
   Mors Gotha, Nystul should ask you two questions. If not, it could be the
   result of how you obtained the Horn fron Praecor Loth. If you got it by
   killing him (instead of waiting for him to give it to you), you may get
   this problem. Fixed by Patch.

7. E001, E002 errors - Need more space on your hard drive. The
   requirments for free hard drive space as published don't seem to be
   correct. When you do a SAVE, many temporary files are created in the
   process of making a new SAVE file set. This will require more free space
   than you might think.

8. Color palette screwed up. Seems to happen primarily on systems with
   a local bus. Fixed by Patch.

9. Moongate not found (or only half there) in room with two hostile
   Brain Creatures, in Yellow maze area of Ethereal Void. No fix yet. But
   you can get to the Shrine of Spirituality another way, and be able to
   finish the game. When you first fall into the Void, you will be facing a
   huge orange wall. Just walk right up to this wall and cast "Portal"


UNANSWERED QUESTIONS
--------------------

1. SA6 - The vending machine has a Pressure Plate here, what does it
   do? (none of the other vending machines have such a plate).

2. Is there any way to up your Search skill after Nelson is murdered?

3. Why does the pile of bones near Krilner (PC1) keep getting smaller?
   In fact, a lot of stuff on the floors seems to dissappear over time in
   the Pits.

4. In the Scintillus Academy, level 5; There is a pushbutton high on
   the wall by the Portcullis. What does it do?

5. How do I get a "lotus turbo esprit", or a "serpent statue"? And
   where the heck is "Jerry the Rat"?


Spell List
----------

The following is a large list of spells for Ultima Underworld 2. The
list does NOT include ALL the spells for the game (at least, not for
sure), because the only way to have them all should be trying 24^2*23
different combinations. Many of these spells were found on the user manual
of the game; others can be discovered through the game, talking with
people or reading some scrolls or books; few of them can be achieved by
triyng different combinations of two or three runes, when you find them by
a corpse (if someone kept them till the end, they should probably be
useful for something...); finally, one or two of these spells must be
found through trial and error, when you only know that the spell EXIST
(for example, if you find a scroll, a wand, or a potion with that power,
in Ultima Underworld II you are sure that the spell can be obtained also
through rune-spelling).

This last way become much easier if you know the different meanings of
the 24 runes:

-------------------------------------------------------------------
|AN   - Negate  |BET  - Small  |CORP  - Death     |DES  - Down    |
|EX   - Freedom |FLAM - Flame  |GRAV  - Energy    |HUR  - Wind    |
|IN   - Cause   |JUX  - Harm   |KAL   - Summon    |LOR  - Light   |
|MANI - Life    |NOX  - Poison |ORT   - Magic     |POR  - Movement|
|QUAS - Illusion|REL  - Change |SANCT - Protection|TYM  - Time    |
|UUS  - Raise   |VAS  - Great  |WIS   - Knowledge |YLEM - Matter  |
-------------------------------------------------------------------


Ultima Underworld II Magic Book
-------------------------------

--------------------------------------------------------------------
| Spells of the 1st Circle       | Spells of the 2nd Circle        |
|                                |                                 |
| IN MANI YLEM   Create Food     | QUAS CORP      Cause Fear       |
| IN LOR         Light           | QUAS MANI YLEM Dispel Hunger    |
| ORT JUX        Magic Arrow     | IN BET MANI    Lesser Heal      |
| BET IN SANCT   Resist Blows    | UUS POR        Jump             |
| UUS DES POR    Bounce          | REL DES POR    Slow Fall        |
| WIS JUX        Detect Traps    | ORT WIS JUX    Deadly Seeker    |
| BET ORT IN     Luck            | IN FLAM JUX    Flame Rune       |
| BET WIS EX     Locate          | QUAS AN CORP   Valor            |
|                                |                                 |
--------------------------------------------------------------------
| Spells of the 3rd Circle       | Spells of the 4th Circle        |
|                                |                                 |
| AN NOX         Cure Poison     | IN MANI        Heal             |
| ORT GRAV       Lightning       | IN AN FLAM     Frost            |
| QUAS LOR       Night Vision    | NOX JUX YLEM   Poison Weapon    |
| REL TYM POR    Speed           | AN JUX         Remove Trap      |
| AN JUX ORT     Dispel Rune     | SANCT FLAM     Flameproof       |
| JUX MANI       Bleeding        | GRAV SANCT POR Missle Protection|
| YLEM POR       Water Walk      | WIS MANI       Study Monster    |
| AN KAL CORP    Repel Undead    |                                 |
|                                |                                 |
--------------------------------------------------------------------
| Spells of the 5th Circle       | Spells of the 6th Circle        |
|                                |                                 |
| REL SANCT YLEM Mending         | VAS IN LOR     Daylight         |
| POR FLAM       Fireball        | VAS REL POR    Gate Travel      |
| ORT WIS YLEM   Name Enchantment| VAS IN MANI    Greater Heal     |
| EX YLEM        Open            | AN EX POR      Paralyze         |
| AN CORP MANI   Smite Undead    | QUAS REL WIS   Charm            |
| ORT POR YLEM   Telekenisis     | VAS SANCT LOR  Invisibility     |
| IN TYM JUX     Time Trap       | VAS ORT GRAV   Sheet Lightning  |
| UUS HUR POR    Levitate        |                                 |
|                                |                                 |
--------------------------------------------------------------------
| Spells of the 7th Circle       | Spells of the 8th Circle        |
|                                |                                 |
| KAL AN MANI    Summon Demon    | FLAM HUR       Flame Wind       |
| VAS AN WIS     Mass Confusion  | AN TYM         Freeze Time      |
| ORT AN QUAS    Reveal          | IN VAS SANCT   Iron Flesh       |
| ORT POR GRAV   Magic Satellite | VAS MANI       Restoration      |
| VAS EX YLEM    Portal          | ORT POR WIS    Roaming Sight    |
| JUX HUR        Shockwave       | VAS JUX MANI   Smite Foe        |
| WIS EX         Map Area        | VAS HUR POR    Fly              |
| VAS ORT YLEM   Enchant Item    |                                 |
| VAS POR YLEM   Tremor          |                                 |
|                                |                                 |
--------------------------------------------------------------------


ABOUT UNKNOWN LEVEL SPELLS
--------------------------

If you find any new spells, and you are not sure about its level or
name, remember that every spell costs 3 mana points per Circle, so that an
EX YLEM casting will spend 15 mana points, and if you look at your mana
flask before and after you do the magic, you get the level.

For the name, if the spell is a duration one, an icon will appear after
the casting, on the spells shelf, to the left of the compass: right-click
on it (a left-click should deactivate the magic), in order to have an
evaluation of the quality of the casting, with the stability (Stable,
Unstable, or Nearly Done) and the name of the spell.

This list was possible only due to the work of Extreme A.I., who
compiled the original list I modified and corrected.
-] StH [-
For suggestions or questions post to morandin@genio.sns.it
